# Mouse visual system

For several decades, much of the work studying visual physiology was carried out
in either primate or cat. This began with Hubel and Wiesel mapping receptive
fields of "simple" and "complex" cells in the primary visual cortex of the cat.
Recordings from neurons in other cortical areas in these animals have revealed
neurons that respond to simple shapes, color, and motion - both direction
selectivity as well as responses selective for more complex motion patters.
Based both on these responses and on anatomical studies, there is thought to be
two parallel streams, the "Dorsal" and "Ventral" streams. The dorsal stream is
considered colloquially to be the "where" pathway, with many areas sensitive to
motion, while the ventral stream is considered to be the "what" pathway, with
neurons showing increased selectivity and invariance in their responses to
objects and faces. Another way of framing these pathways is an "egocentric" and
an "allocentric" pathway.

## Cortical physiology

Starting in the early 2000s, researchers begans studying visual physiology and
behavior in the mouse in earnest. Cris Niell used extracellular
electrophysiology to record receptive fields of neurons in the mouse
{term}`Primary visual cortex`, finding receptive fields that looked very similar
to those found in cat and primate {reference}. Many neurons showed orientation
selectivity - selectively responding to gratings at a particular orientation -
or direction selectivity - responding selectivity to gratings moving in a
particular direction. Neurons also showed linear and non-linear summation that
were the hallmarks of simple and complex cells. The key difference in these
receptive fields is in their size. Mice have much poorer spatial resolution than
primates and cats!

![rfs](/resources/NiellHubermann_RFs.png)

Using {term}`Two-photon calcium imaging` allowed large populations of neurons to
be recorded across the cortex, and another key early result was that mouse (and
rodents broadly) lack the orientation columns found in primates and cats. While
the latter species have neurons that are tuned with similar orientations
organized in columns, the rodent visual cortex has a "salt and pepper"
organization, where the orientation selectively of neighboring neurons are
randomly organized. {reference Ohki 2005}

Beyond {term}`V1` there are additional higher visual areas (or {term}`HVA`s)
that receive input from V1 and are connected in a hierarchical manner. 
Higher visual areas each contain a distinct map of {term}`Retinotopy`, i.e. each visual area has its own 
map of visual space. The borders between higher visual areas can be identified
based on reversals in the retinotopic map at area boundaries. Are

An early question was whether neurons in different mouse {term}`HVA`s had distinct
visual responses to subserve distinct functions. One framing of this question is
whether there are streams akin to the dorsal and ventral streams in primate and
cat. Early studies using {term}`Two-photon calcium imaging` compared the
{term}`Spatial frequency` and {term}`Temporal frequency` tuning across several
HVAs, finding evidence of functional differences between some of the areas.
These results, alongside connectivity data, are suggestive that such a
dorsal/ventral organization might be present - though with much more
interconnection and a lower hierarchical depth than found in primates/cats. 
{Niell, 2011 Primer on early studies of mouse HVA functional properties: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24636}

![dorsal_ventral](/resources/Niell_visual_hierarchy.png)

- More non-standard neurons in mouse {Masland martin}

- Locomotion/arousal shapes responses (of ~10% of neurons)

- Behavioral state and experinece dependent (Pakan 2018)

